Add explanation of various components within SP (#530)
canonical/sphinx-docs-starter-pack: docs/explanation/components.rst

.. meta::
    :description: A breakdown of Canonical's Sphinx Starter Pack that covers its constituent elements and their purpose.

.. _explanation-components:

Starter pack components
=======================

> The Starter Pack is a template `Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/>`__ project. It provides the default layout for a new project's file structure, a theme, and all the necessary dependencies.

Reviewer: Optional:
```suggestion
The Starter Pack is a template `Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/>`__ project. It provides a default file structure, theme, and dependencies for Canonical documentation.
```
A slightly more concise opener.

> for Canonical documentation

I don't like implying that this isn't useful for the broader community, but it accurately reflects the state of the project.

Sphinx
------

Sphinx is the core documentation static site generator that converts reStructuredText or Markdown files into HTML.

> `docs/conf.py` is a configuration file that defines the properties of the Sphinx project such as project metadata and dependencies.

Reviewer: How do you feel about referring to this as "the configuration file" once its established here? It might be a little more natural for readers.

 
.. figure:: assets/sphinx-build-engine.png
    :class: with-border

    Sphinx as a documentation static site generator
    
Python
------

Because Sphinx is a Python application, the Starter Pack depends on Python and a Python package manager. Most of its dependencies are Python packages. As it is generally recommended to work on projects locally in a virtual environment, the Starter Pack's local build relies on Python ``venv``. 

To be able to work on a Starter Pack project, your host needs Python 3.11, pip, and venv.

.. figure:: assets/python-starter-pack.png
    :class: with-border

    Python's role in the Starter Pack

Extensions
----------

Sphinx's default functionality can be expanded with built-in or third-party extensions for tasks, such as creating diagrams, testing code, and more. 

The Starter Pack is preconfigured with a curated and tested set of extensions.

.. figure:: assets/extensions.png
    :class: with-border

    Extension types
        
Built-in extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Built-in extensions do not need to be installed separately from Sphinx and can be enabled directly through `docs/conf.py`.

> `docs/conf.py` in the Starter Pack has already been configured to enabled typical extensions necessary for documentation work.

Reviewer: Optional:
```suggestion
The Starter Pack enables commonly-used extensions by default.
```

Third-party extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If an extension is not built into Sphinx, you must include it in `requirements.txt` before you can enable it in the Sphinx configuration file. 

> As extensions are Python packages, the Starter Pack uses a `requirements.txt <https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/requirements-file-format/>`_ file to manage them.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extensions are Python packages, and the Starter Pack uses a `requirements.txt <https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/requirements-file-format/>`_ file to manage them.  
```

.. figure:: assets/third-party.png
    :class: with-border

    Third-party extensions

Markdown support
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, Sphinx uses reStructuredText. To be able to build Markdown, it relies on the `MyST parser <https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_, enabled by the `myst-parser` extension.

Canonical theme
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Canonical theme is packaged as a standalone `canonical-sphinx <https://github.com/canonical/canonical-sphinx>`_ extension. It is based on an upstream Furo theme and is designed to follow Canonical branding.

> Command line tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Command-line tools
```

------------------

> The Starter Pack uses Make as its local build system. The Starter Pack's Makefile serves as an interface for operating the project, including setting up the virtual environment, installing dependencies, and more, through CLI commands.

Reviewer: Optional:
```suggestion
The Starter Pack uses Make as its local build system. The Starter Pack's Makefile provides a command-line interface for setting up the virtual environment, installing dependencies, building the documentation, and more.
```

.. meta::
    :description: Learn about what Starter Pack is made 

.. _explanation-components:

Starter pack components
#######################

Starter pack is template of a `Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/>`_ project, it provides a layout of the project's file structure, a theme, and all the necessary dependencies.

Sphinx
======

`Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/>`_  is the core documentation build engine that converts reStructuredText or Markdown files into HTML.

`docs/conf.py` is a configuration file that defines the properties of the Sphinx project such as project metadata and dependencies.
 
.. mermaid::
    :caption: Sphinx as build engine 

    graph TD
        Source@{ shape: doc, label: "Source files<br>.rst or .md"}
        Conf@{ shape: doc, label: "Project configuration file<br>docs/conf.py"}
        SphinxEng["Sphinx engine"]
        HTML@{ shape: doc, label: "HTML"}

        Source -- provides content to --> SphinxEng
        Conf -- provides settings to --> SphinxEng
        SphinxEng -- generates --> HTML

Python
======

> Sphinx is a Python application and many of its extensions are Python applications. By extension, Starter pack depends on Python and Python package manager. As it is generally recommended to work on projects locally in a virtual environment, Starter pack's local build relies on Python ``venv``. 

Reviewer 2: Recommended:

```suggestion
Because Sphinx is a Python application, the Starter Pack depends on Python and a Python package manager. Most of its dependencies are Python packages. As it is generally recommended to work on projects locally in a virtual environment, the Starter Pack's local build relies on Python ``venv``. 
```

"extension... by extension" has the chance to confuse readers.

To be able to work on a Starter pack-based project, you must have ``python3``, ``python3-venv``, and ``python3-pip`` on your system.

.. mermaid::
    :caption: Python's role in Starter Pack

    graph TD
        Python["Python<br>(python3, python3-venv, python3-pip)"]
        subgraph VEnv["Virtual environment"]
            SphinxEng["Sphinx engine"]
            Dependencies["Project dependencies"]
            HTML@{ shape: doc, label: "HTML"}
        end          

        Python -- creates --> VEnv
        Python -- installs --> Dependencies
        SphinxEng -- builds --> HTML
        SphinxEng -- relies on --> Dependencies

Extensions
==========

Sphinx's default functionality can always be changed and expanded with built-in or third-party extensions for tasks like creating diagrams, testing code, and more. 

Starter pack is preconfigured with a curated and tested set of extensions.

.. mermaid::

>     :caption: Extention types

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    :caption: Extension types
```

Makefile
--------

Some of the commands that Makefile has are built to represent Sphinx-native functionality for building documentation or testing the URLs in a simplified form while also managing all the necessary dependencies, for example, instead of using `sphinx-build linkcheck SOURCEDIR OUTPUTDIR` command, you can use `make linkcheck`. 

See :ref:`explanation-build` to learn how the local build process works.  

Additionally, the Makefile provides commands to trigger third-party CLI tools, such as the Vale prose linter for :ref:`automatic-checks-styleguide`.

.. mermaid::
    :caption: Makefile build interface and its targets

    graph LR
       Makefile@{ shape: doc, label: "Makefile" }
       SphinxEng["Sphinx commands<br>(html, linkcheck)"]
       Dependencies["Project dependencies"]
       Vale["Language linter<br>(Vale)"]
       
       Makefile -- simplifies & invokes --> SphinxEng
       Makefile -- installs --> Dependencies
       Makefile -- triggers --> Vale

Read The Docs configuration file
================================

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

Read The Docs is a documentation building and hosting platform. It takes the documentation created using Sphinx (or other tools) and builds and publishes it online.

```

            end
        Conf@{ shape: doc, label: "docs/conf.py"}
        Req@{ shape: doc, label: "requirements.txt"}

        Python -- installs --> Req
        SphinxEng -- provides --> BuiltIn
        Req -- specifies --> ThirdParty
        Dependencies --  enabled in --> Conf
        
Built-in extensions
-------------------

Built-in extensions do not need to be installed separately from Sphinx and can be enabled directly through `docs/conf.py`.
`docs/conf.py` in the Starter Pack has already been configured to enabled typical extensions necessary for docmentation work.

.. _default-extensions:

The following extensions are enabled by default:

* ``canonical_sphinx``
* ``notfound.extension``
* ``sphinx.ext.intersphinx``
* ``sphinx_config_options``
* ``sphinx_contributor_listing``
* ``sphinx_copybutton``
* ``sphinx_design``
* ``sphinx_filtered_toctree``
* ``sphinx_last_updated_by_git``
* ``sphinx_related_links``
* ``sphinx_reredirects``
* ``sphinx_roles``
* ``sphinx_sitemap``
* ``sphinx_tabs.tabs``
* ``sphinx_terminal``
* ``sphinx_ubuntu_images``
* ``sphinx_youtube_links``
* ``sphinxcontrib.cairosvgconverter``
* ``sphinxcontrib.jquery``

> * ``sphinxext.opengraph``

Reviewer 4: Nitpick: This feels more like reference material (rather than explanation material)
